feat: add single sequencer (#2016)
rollkit/rollkit: specs/lazy-adr/adr-013-single-sequencer.md

> # ADR 11: Single Sequencer

Reviewer: ```suggestion
# ADR 13: Single Sequencer
```

## Changelog

- 2024-10-01: Initial draft

## Context

Rollkit supports modular sequencer implementations and a single sequencer is a simple and efficient solution that can serve as a starting point for rollup developers who don't need the complexity of a decentralized sequencing solution.

> The single sequencer needs to implement the Generic Sequencer interface defined in the `go-sequencing` package, provide transaction batching capabilities, and reliably submit these batches to a DA layer. It should also maintain state to track submitted batches and provide verification capabilities.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The single sequencer needs to implement the Generic Sequencer interface defined in the `core/sequencer` package, provide transaction batching capabilities, and reliably submit these batches to a DA layer. It should also maintain state to track submitted batches and provide verification capabilities.
```

A decentralized sequencer would distribute the sequencing responsibility across multiple nodes, providing better censorship resistance and fault tolerance. However, this approach introduces significant complexity in terms of consensus, leader election, and coordination between nodes. It would also require more resources to operate and maintain.

This approach was not chosen for the initial implementation because:

1. It adds unnecessary complexity for many use cases
2. It requires more development time and resources
3. Many rollup projects start with a single sequencer and gradually move towards decentralization

### Embedded Sequencer in Rollup Nodes

Another approach would be to embed sequencing functionality directly into rollup nodes. This would simplify the architecture by eliminating a separate sequencer component.

This approach was not chosen because:

1. It couples sequencing logic with rollup node logic, reducing modularity
2. It makes it harder to upgrade or replace the sequencing component independently
3. It doesn't allow for a dedicated sequencing service that can be optimized separately

## Decision

We implement a standalone single sequencer that:

> 1. Implements the Generic Sequencer interface from the `go-sequencing` package

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. Implements the Generic Sequencer interface from the `core/sequencer` package
```

       lastBatchHashMutex sync.RWMutex       // Mutex for thread-safe access to lastBatchHash

       seenBatches      map[string]struct{}  // Map to track batches that have been processed
       seenBatchesMutex sync.Mutex           // Mutex for thread-safe access to seenBatches
       bq               *BatchQueue          // Queue for storing batches ready for processing

       db    *badger.DB  // BadgerDB instance for persistent storage
       dbMux sync.Mutex  // Mutex for safe concurrent DB access

       metrics *Metrics  // Structure to hold metrics for monitoring
   }
   ```

3. **Metrics**: Structure to hold metrics for monitoring

   ```go
   type Metrics struct {
       GasPrice            metrics.Gauge    // Tracks the gas price used for DA submissions
       LastBlobSize        metrics.Gauge    // Tracks the size of the last submitted blob
       TransactionStatus   metrics.Counter  // Counts transaction status outcomes
       NumPendingBlocks    metrics.Gauge    // Tracks the number of blocks waiting to be submitted
       IncludedBlockHeight metrics.Gauge    // Tracks the height of the last included block in the DA layer
   }
   ```

### APIs

> The single sequencer implements the Generic Sequencer interface from the `go-sequencing` package:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The single sequencer implements the Generic Sequencer interface from the `core/sequencer` package:
```
